Refactor debugging through coding (#9455)
flutter/website: src/testing/code-debugging.md

[`flutter_gdb`]: https://github.com/flutter/engine/blob/main/sky/tools/flutter_gdb

> ## Log your application

Reviewer: Should this be "Add logging to your application"?

I don't think of log as a verb outside of tree felling...

}
```

## Debug app layers using flags

Each layer of the Flutter framework provides a function to dump its
current state or events to the console using the `debugPrint` property.

{{site.alert.note}}
  All of the following examples were run as macOS native apps on

>   a MacBook Pro M1 Pro. These will differ from any dumps your

Reviewer 2: Still not fixed.

}
```

This application produces the following widget tree.

<details markdown="1">
<summary><strong>

> Expand the widget tree for Example 1

Reviewer 3: Perhaps "Expand to view the" or "Expand for" would be more accurate? Since it's not the widget tree itself being expanded.

```suggestion
Expand to view the widget tree for Example 1
```

You'll see a lot of widgets in there that don't appear in your
application's source, because they are inserted by the framework's
widgets' build functions. For example,

> [`_InkFeature_`][] is an implementation detail of the [`Material`][] widget.

Reviewer 3: 1. I'm assuming you meant to make this private, in which case it should be just: `[`_InkFeature`][]`

2. As far as I can tell, there is no `_InkFeature` class in Flutter. There is however a `_InkFeatures`.

   There must have been a change in Flutter at some point as the above tree doesn't include `_InkFeatures`. Can you follow the instructions above to regenerate the dumped widget tree, update that, then update this mention to the still relevant (implementation detail) widget.

Author: It's InkFeature set to private. @HansMuller verified this for me.

Reviewer 4: As @parlough points out, the current name of the class is `_InkFeatures`.

Author: @HansMuller : Does this mean every instance of `_InkFeature` becomes `_InkFeatures` and I remove the link to `InkFeature`? Also, how would the tree change?

Thanks!

Reviewer 4: The Material class creates an `_InkFeatures` widget and AFAICT Flutter does not contain a widget called `_InkFeature`. The tree will not change; view this update as correcting a spelling mistake.

### Render tree

If you are trying to debug a layout issue, then the Widgets layer's
tree might be insufficiently detailed. To dump the rendering tree,

> call the [`debugDumpRenderTree()`][] method.

Reviewer 3: Since it's not a class or instance function, it is not a method, just a function.

```suggestion
call the [`debugDumpRenderTree()`][] function.
```

To call `debugDumpRenderTree()`, you need to add `import
'package:flutter/rendering.dart';` to your source file.

<details markdown="1">
<summary><strong>

> Expand the render tree for Example 1

Reviewer 3: Perhaps "Expand to view the" or "Expand for" would be more accurate? Since it's not the render tree itself being expanded.

```suggestion
Expand to view the output render tree for Example 1
```

}
```

When enabled, Flutter displays the following changes to your app:

* all boxes in a bright teal border
* all padding, from widgets like `Padding`,
  as a box with a faded blue fill and blue border around the child widget
* all alignment, from widgets like `Center` and `Align`, with yellow arrows

> * all spacers, from widgets like `Container` when they have no child, in gray

Author: Made other changes.

which causes layers to be overlayed with a rotating set of
colors whenever they are repainted.

These flags only work in [debug mode][].
Any function or method in the Flutter framework that starts with
"`debug...`" only works in debug mode.

## Debug animation issues

{{site.alert.note}}
  To debug animations with the least effort, slow them down.

>   To slow down the animation, click **Slow Animations** in DevTools' [Inspector view][]. This reduces the animation to 20% speed.

Author: It removes the value judgment of how easy this is to do.

If you are trying to debug a compositing issue, you can use
[`debugDumpLayerTree()`][].

<details markdown="1">

> <summary>Expand the layer tree for Example 1</summary>

Reviewer 3: Same as above, perhaps "Expand to view the" or "Expand for" would be more accurate? Since it's not the layer tree itself being expanded.

```suggestion
<summary>Expand to view the output layer tree for Example 1</summary>
```

### Focus tree

To debug a focus or shortcut issue, dump the focus tree

> using the [`debugDumpFocusTree()`][] method.

Reviewer 3: Since it's not a class or instance function, it is not a method, just a function.

```suggestion
using the [`debugDumpFocusTree()`][] function.
```

> #### Example 4: Focus tree dump

Reviewer 3: Why does this have a header and where does the 4 come from? The previous dumps didn't have a header.

{:.no_toc}

> The `debugDumpFocusTree()` method returns the focus tree for the app.

Reviewer 3: According to the [docs](https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/debugDumpFocusTree.html), it doesn't return the tree, it just prints it.

Also, doesn't this text just duplicate the content on L696-L697. Could it just be dropped?

<details markdown="1">

> <summary>Expand the focus tree for Example 1</summary>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<summary>Expand to view the focus tree for Example 1</summary>
```

### Semantics tree

To obtain a dump of the Semantics tree
(the tree presented to the system accessibility APIs), use the
[`debugDumpSemanticsTree()`][] method.
To use this, first enable accessibility.
To enable accessibility, use a system accessibility tool
or the `SemanticsDebugger`.

> The `debugDumpSemanticsTree()` method returns the semantic tree for the app.

Reviewer 3: It doesn't return the tree, just prints it.

```suggestion
The `debugDumpSemanticsTree()` function prints the semantic tree for the app.
```

and the [`debugPrintEndFrameBanner`][] booleans to print the
beginning and end of the frames to the console.

> **The print frame banner log for Example 1**

Reviewer 3: We don't really use this style of introducing a block of code anywhere else, perhaps stick to introductory text and a colon for familiarity?

Author: Stet. This is consistent with the other log listings, which are behind bolded accordions.

This is a boolean from the `rendering` library. It can be
enabled at any time and affects all painting while it is true.
The easiest way to set it is at the top of your `void main()`
entry point.

> #### Example 2

Reviewer 3: Calling this "Example 2" was a bit confusing to me. Example 2 of what? It doesn't seem to be related to "Example 1".

or by importing the module and setting the value in your
`main()` method, following by a hot restart.

> [`debugDumpRenderTree()`][]</dt>

Reviewer 3: Here and in the other cases below, you'll need to the drop the unmatched `</dt>` tags as they show up in the rendered HTML.

```suggestion
[`debugDumpRenderTree()`][]
```

: Call this function when not in a layout or repaint
  phase to dump the rendering tree to the console.
  (Pressing **t** from `flutter run` calls this command.)
  Search for "RepaintBoundary" to see diagnostics
  on how useful a boundary is.

{% comment %} Feature is not yet added to DevTools:
    Rather than using this flag to dump the render tree
    to a file, view the render tree in the Flutter inspector.
    To do so, bring up the Flutter inspector and select the
    **Render Tree** tab.
{% endcomment %}

[`debugPaintLayerBordersEnabled`][]</dt>

> : PENDING

Reviewer 3: If you have a chance, can you make an issue for documenting this? Otherwise it might stay as pending indefinitely.

[`debugDumpRenderTree()`][]
: Call this function when not in a layout or repaint
  phase to dump the rendering tree to the console.
  (Press <kbd>t</kbd> from `flutter run` to call this command.)
  Search for "RepaintBoundary" to see diagnostics
  on how useful a boundary is.

{% comment %} Feature is not yet added to DevTools:
    Rather than using this flag to dump the render tree
    to a file, view the render tree in the Flutter inspector.
    To do so, bring up the Flutter inspector and select the
    **Render Tree** tab.
{% endcomment %}

[`debugPaintLayerBordersEnabled`][]
: Enable this flag if you need to see the boundaries of each layer.
  When enabled, each layer paints a box around its boundary.

[`debugRepaintRainbowEnabled`][]
: To enable this flag in the Flutter inspector, click **Highlight Repaints**.
  If any static widgets are rotating through the colors of the rainbow,
  consider adding repaint boundaries to those areas.

[`debugPrintMarkNeedsLayoutStacks`][]
: Enable this flag if you're seeing more layouts
  than you expect (for example, on the timeline, on a profile,
  or from a `print` statement inside a layout method).

>   When enabled, the console shows stack traces that explain why each
>   the inspector marked each render object as dirty for layout.

Reviewer 3: Looks like the wording got messed up here. 

```suggestion
  When enabled, the framework outputs stack traces to the console
  to explain why each render object is being marked as needing layout.
```

>   You can use the `debugPrintStack()` method from the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  You can use the `debugPrintStack()` function from the
```

  `services` library to print your own stack traces on demand,

>   if this helps you.

Reviewer 3: Since you're touching this, consider dropping the conditional or putting it first.

[`debugPrintMarkNeedsPaintStacks`][]
: Similar to `debugPrintMarkNeedsLayoutStacks`,
  but for excess painting. You can use the `debugPrintStack()`

>   method from the `services` library to print your own stack

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  function from the `services` library to print your own stack
```

>   traces on demand, if this kind of approach is useful to you.

Reviewer 3: Since you're touching this, consider dropping the conditional or putting it first.

[`MaterialApp`][], [`CupertinoApp`][], or [`WidgetsApp`][]
constructor:

#### Example 3
{:.no_toc}

<?code-excerpt "lib/performance_overlay.dart (PerfOverlay)" replace="/showPerformanceOverlay: true,/[[highlight]]$&[[\/highlight]]/g"?>

> ```dart

Reviewer 3: Code highlighting doesn't yet working without prettify (I'm working on this now), so you'll have to switch this one back.

<img width="636" alt="The rendered output having the highlight tag" src="https://github.com/flutter/website/assets/18372958/304263a1-57e4-426f-a100-2c482e957458">

Author: Removed.

    );
  }
}
```

(If you're not using `MaterialApp`, `CupertinoApp`,
or `WidgetsApp`, you can get the same effect by wrapping your
application in a stack and putting a widget on your stack that was
created by calling [`PerformanceOverlay.allEnabled()`][].)

> TO learn how to interpret the graphs in the overlay,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To learn how to interpret the graphs in the overlay,
```
